frameworks/command.rst, before:

.. _command_framework_docs:

Command Framework
=================

If you're coming from C++ or Java, you are probably familiar with the `Command based robot paradigm <https://wpilib.screenstepslive.com/s/4485/m/13810/l/241892-what-is-command-based-programming>`_.
All of the pieces you're used to are still here, but this guide might help save
you a bit of time as you make the transition.

If you're starting Command based programming in Python and have no experience
with it in other languages, make sure you familiarize yourself with it before
proceeding. This guide only covers differences between Python and the other
languages's versions of that paradigm.

For the impatient, a `fully-working example program <https://github.com/robotpy/examples/tree/master/command-based>`_
is available. You can start with that and modify it to meet your needs.

The Basics
----------
The structure of a Command based program is simple and predictable. You inherit
from the ``IterativeRobot`` class, configure the robot in ``robotInit()``, and
then run the ``Scheduler`` inside the ``*Periodic()`` methods.

Writing it can be done rather quickly, but the robotpy-wpilib-utilities package
contains a pre-built skeleton class you can inherit, meaning that your program
only needs to implement functions unique to your robot. Here is an example::

    import wpilib
    from commandbased import CommandBasedRobot

    from commands import AutonomousCommandGroup

    class MyRobot(CommandBasedRobot):

        def robotInit(self):
            '''Initialize things like subsystems'''

            self.autonomous = AutonomousCommandGroup()


        def autonomousInit(self):
            self.autonomous.start()


Setting up the scheduler and running it are handled by the CommandBasedRobot
class. You only need to write the code for ``*Init()`` methods you want to use.
Since you are overriding that class, you can easily change any functionality
that doesn't work for your robot, though `the default implementation <https://github.com/robotpy/robotpy-wpilib-utilities/blob/master/commandbased/commandbasedrobot.py>`_
should work for most cases.

Error Handling
--------------

Crashes happen. Even the most careful programmer can write a command that breaks
under unexpected conditions. Normally this will cause your program to reboot,
costing precious seconds during a competition. With this in mind, the
``Scheduler`` is run inside an exception handler. If a crash happens inside a
Command while your robot is connection to the Field Management System (i.e. -
during a competition) the exception will be caught, running commands will be
canceled, the error will be printed on the driver's station, and the Scheduler
loop will continue running normally.

If you need more advanced error handling functionality, you can override the
```handleCrash()``` method in your robot.py.

Pythonic Command Based Programming
----------------------------------

All the classes you know from C++ and Java still exists in Python, allowing you
to directly port your code with minimal changes. However, you can use some of
the advantages of Python to make a few things a bit easier.

Subsystems
~~~~~~~~~~

In C++ and Java, the recommended way of making subsystems available to Commands
is to instantiate them in the ``init()`` method of a class that subclasses
``Command``, and then use that as the base class for all of your classes. Even
in those languages that can be a bit unwieldy, especially if you want your
commands to inherit from multiple base classes.

A more appropriate method in Python is to instantiate your subsystems inside a
module, then import that module anywhere you need subsystems. Here is a simple
example of that module, which we will call ``subsystems``::

    from subsystemtype import SubsystemType

    subsystem1 = None

    def init():
        global subsystem1

        subsystem1 = SubsystemType()

You can import this module in your ``robot.py`` and then call
``subsystems.init()`` inside ``robotInit()`` before any commands are
instantiated. Then you can access your subsystem from any Command like this::

    import subsystems
    from wpilib.command import InstantCommand

    class ExampleCommand(InstantCommand):

        def __init__(self):
            self.requires(subsystems.subsystem1)

        def initialize(self):
            subsystems.subsystem1.do_something()

By using this method you can override any Command provided by WPILib or
robotpy-wpilib-utilities, with pythonic namespacing. For even better structure,
make ``subsystems`` a package that holds the code for all of your subsystems, as
demonstrated in the `example program <https://github.com/robotpy/examples/tree/master/command-based/subsystems>`_.

RobotMap
~~~~~~~~

Having a single place to store your robot's configuration can be very helpful,
and this is why most Command based robots integrate a ``RobotMap.*`` file to
store port numbers. In Python you can create a ``robotmap`` module that will act
similarly. There are many different possible ways to manage your ports:

1.) Raw variables::

    drive_front_left = 1
    drive_front_right = 2
    drive_rear_left = 3
    drive_rear_right = 4

2.) Dictionary::

    drive = {
        'front_left': 1,
        'front_right': 2,
        'rear_left': 3,
        'rear_right': 4
    }

3.) Object Properties::

    class PortList():
        pass

    drive = PortList()

    drive.front_left = 1
    drive.front_right = 2
    drive.rear_left = 3
    drive.rear_right = 4

Whichever method you choose, you can utilize it simply by importing::

    import robotmap
    from wpilib.command import Subsystem

    class DriveSubsystem(Subsystem):
        def __init__():
            front_left_motor = robotmap.drive_front_left

Final Thoughts
--------------

Welcome to FRC programming with Python. This documentation is still developing,
so if you find a great trick to make programming your robot in the Command based
paradigm more "pythonic", please update it with your ideas.

.. seealso:: :ref:`magicbot_framework_docs`

Commit message:

Don't suggest module-level subsystem variables

frameworks/command.rst, after:

.. _command_framework_docs:

Command Framework
=================

If you're coming from C++ or Java, you are probably familiar with the `Command based robot paradigm <https://wpilib.screenstepslive.com/s/4485/m/13810/l/241892-what-is-command-based-programming>`_.
All of the pieces you're used to are still here, but this guide might help save
you a bit of time as you make the transition.

If you're starting Command based programming in Python and have no experience
with it in other languages, make sure you familiarize yourself with it before
proceeding. This guide only covers differences between Python and the other
languages's versions of that paradigm.

For the impatient, a `fully-working example program <https://github.com/robotpy/examples/tree/master/command-based>`_
is available. You can start with that and modify it to meet your needs.

The Basics
----------
The structure of a Command based program is simple and predictable. You inherit
from the ``IterativeRobot`` class, configure the robot in ``robotInit()``, and
then run the ``Scheduler`` inside the ``*Periodic()`` methods.

Writing it can be done rather quickly, but the robotpy-wpilib-utilities package
contains a pre-built skeleton class you can inherit, meaning that your program
only needs to implement functions unique to your robot. Here is an example::

    from commandbased import CommandBasedRobot
    from mycommands import AutonomousCommandGroup

    class MyRobot(CommandBasedRobot):

        def robotInit(self):
            self.autonomous = AutonomousCommandGroup()


        def autonomousInit(self):
            self.autonomous.start()


Setting up the scheduler and running it are handled by the CommandBasedRobot
class. You only need to write the code for ``*Init()`` methods you want to use.
Since you are overriding that class, you can easily change any functionality
that doesn't work for your robot, though `the default implementation <https://github.com/robotpy/robotpy-wpilib-utilities/blob/master/commandbased/commandbasedrobot.py>`_
should work for most cases.

Error Handling
--------------

Crashes happen. Even the most careful programmer can write a command that breaks
under unexpected conditions. Normally this will cause your program to reboot,
costing precious seconds during a competition. With this in mind, the
``Scheduler`` is run inside an exception handler. If a crash happens inside a
Command while your robot is connection to the Field Management System (i.e. -
during a competition) the exception will be caught, running commands will be
canceled, the error will be printed on the driver's station, and the Scheduler
loop will continue running normally.

If you need more advanced error handling functionality, you can override the
```handleCrash()``` method in your robot.py.

Pythonic Command Based Programming
----------------------------------

All the classes you know from C++ and Java still exists in Python, allowing you
to directly port your code with minimal changes. However, you can use some of
the advantages of Python to make a few things a bit easier.

Subsystems
~~~~~~~~~~

In C++ and Java, the recommended way of making subsystems available to Commands
is to instantiate them as static members in the static ``init()`` method of a class that subclasses ``Command``, and then use that as the base class for all of your classes. Even in those languages that can be a bit unwieldy, especially if you want to override a specialized base class like ``InstantCommand``.

Python is extremely versatile, and offers many ways to allow commands to access subsystems. Here is one possible implementation::

    def robotInit(self):
        subsystem1 = SubsystemType()
        Command.getSubsystem1 = lambda x=0: subsystem1

Then you can access your subsystem from any Command like this::

    from wpilib.command import InstantCommand

    class ExampleCommand(InstantCommand):

        def __init__(self):
            self.requires(self.getSubsystem1())

        def initialize(self):
            self.getSubsystem1().do_something()

By using this method you can override any Command provided by WPILib or
robotpy-wpilib-utilities. You can see a slightly different method for making subsystems available in the `example program <https://github.com/robotpy/examples/tree/master/command-based/robot.py>`_.

 .. note:: The placement of subsystem and command creation is very important. 
           Subsystems must be instantiated in ``robotInit()``, and they must be 
           created before any command that uses them. Additionally, if 
           ``robotInit()`` is called multiple times, as happens in the simulator, 
           your subsystems must be re-instantiated each time.

RobotMap
~~~~~~~~

Having a single place to store your robot's configuration can be very helpful,
and this is why most Command based robots integrate a ``RobotMap.*`` file to
store port numbers. In Python you can create a ``robotmap`` module that will act
similarly. There are many different possible ways to manage your ports:

1.) Raw variables::

    drive_front_left = 1
    drive_front_right = 2
    drive_rear_left = 3
    drive_rear_right = 4

2.) Dictionary::

    drive = {
        'front_left': 1,
        'front_right': 2,
        'rear_left': 3,
        'rear_right': 4
    }

3.) Object Properties::

    class PortList():
        pass

    drive = PortList()

    drive.front_left = 1
    drive.front_right = 2
    drive.rear_left = 3
    drive.rear_right = 4

Whichever method you choose, you can utilize it simply by importing::

    import robotmap
    from wpilib.command import Subsystem

    class DriveSubsystem(Subsystem):
        def __init__():
            front_left_motor = robotmap.drive_front_left

Final Thoughts
--------------

Welcome to FRC programming with Python. This documentation is still developing,
so if you find a great trick to make programming your robot in the Command based
paradigm more "pythonic", please update it with your ideas.

.. seealso:: :ref:`magicbot_framework_docs`
